\documentclass[9pt,twocolumn,twoside,lineno]{pnas-new}

% Use the lineno option to display guide line numbers if required.
% Note that the use of elements such as single-column equations
% may affect the guide line number alignment.


\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}

% tightlist command for lists without linebreak
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}


% Pandoc citation processing
\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
\newlength{\csllabelwidth}
\setlength{\csllabelwidth}{3em}
\newlength{\cslentryspacingunit} % times entry-spacing
\setlength{\cslentryspacingunit}{\parskip}
% for Pandoc 2.8 to 2.10.1
\newenvironment{cslreferences}%
  {}%
  {\par}
% For Pandoc 2.11+
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}[2] % #1 hanging-ident, #2 entry spacing
 {% don't indent paragraphs
  \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
  % turn on hanging indent if param 1 is 1
  \ifodd #1
  \let\oldpar\par
  \def\par{\hangindent=\cslhangindent\oldpar}
  \fi
  % set entry spacing
  \setlength{\parskip}{#2\cslentryspacingunit}
 }%
 {}
\usepackage{calc}
\newcommand{\CSLBlock}[1]{#1\hfill\break}
\newcommand{\CSLLeftMargin}[1]{\parbox[t]{\csllabelwidth}{#1}}
\newcommand{\CSLRightInline}[1]{\parbox[t]{\linewidth - \csllabelwidth}{#1}\break}
\newcommand{\CSLIndent}[1]{\hspace{\cslhangindent}#1}


\templatetype{pnasresearcharticle}  % Choose template

\title{Environmentally robust \emph{cis}-regulatory changes underlie
rapid climatic adaptation}

\author[a,b,1,2]{Mallory A. Ballinger}
\author[c,1]{Katya L. Mack}
\author[a,b]{Sylvia M. Durkin}
\author[a,d]{Eric A. Riddell}
\author[a,b,2]{Michael W. Nachman}

  \affil[a]{Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720}
  \affil[b]{Department of Integrative Biology, University of California,
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 94720}
  \affil[c]{Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
94305}
  \affil[d]{Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology,
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, 50011}


% Please give the surname of the lead author for the running footer
\leadauthor{Ballinger, Mack}

% Please add here a significance statement to explain the relevance of your work
\significancestatement{Little is known about the relative contributions
of genetic versus environmental factors to gene expression variation in
natural populations. Here, we discovered that genetic effects were far
more pervasive than environmental effects on gene expression differences
between house mice that have rapidly adapted to new environments.
Notably, many of these genetic effects are under selection and underlie
adaptive body size differences between populations. However, we also
identified a few genes controlling plastic expression across different
environments. Our study is one of the few to identify loci associated
with plasticity in natural populations and supports the central role of
genetic effects in the form of \textit{cis}-regulatory divergence in
adaptive evolution over extremely short timescales (a few hundred
generations).}


\authorcontributions{M.A.B. and M.W.N. designed research. M.A.B.,
S.M.D., and E.A.R. performed research. M.A.B. and K.L.M. analyzed data.
M.A.B., K.L.M., and M.W.N. wrote the paper.}

\authordeclaration{The authors declare no conflict of interest.}

\equalauthors{\textsuperscript{1} M.A.B. and K.L.M. contributed equally
to this work.}

\correspondingauthor{\textsuperscript{2} To whom correspondence should
be addressed. M.A.B.,
\href{mailto:mallory.ballinger@berkeley.edu}{\nolinkurl{mallory.ballinger@berkeley.edu}};
M.W.N.,
\href{mailto:mnachman@berkeley.edu}{\nolinkurl{mnachman@berkeley.edu}}}

% Keywords are not mandatory, but authors are strongly encouraged to provide them. If provided, please include two to five keywords, separated by the pipe symbol, e.g:
 \keywords{  adaptation |  \textit{cis}-regulatory
evolution |  \textit{plasticity}-eQTL |  \textit{Mus}  } 

\begin{abstract}
Changes in gene expression have been proposed to play a major role in
adaptive evolution. However, gene expression is highly context-dependent
and very few studies have determined the influence of genetic and
non-genetic effects on adaptive gene regulation in natural populations.
Here, we utilize context-dependent allele-specific expression to
characterize \textit{cis} and \textit{trans} changes underlying
divergence in temperate and tropical house mice in two metabolic tissues
under two thermal conditions. First, we show that gene expression
divergence is pervasive between populations and across thermal
conditions, with roughly 5-10\% of genes exhibiting
genotype-by-environment interactions. Second, we found that most
intraspecific regulatory divergence was due to \textit{cis}-regulatory
changes that were stable across temperatures. In contrast, patterns of
expression plasticity were largely attributable to
\textit{trans}-effects, which showed greater sensitivity to temperature.
Nonetheless, we discovered a small subset of temperature-dependent
\textit{cis}-regulatory changes, thereby identifying loci underlying
expression plasticity. Finally, we performed scans for selection in wild
house mice to identify genomic signatures of rapid adaptation. Genomic
outliers were enriched in genes with evidence for
\textit{cis}-regulatory divergence. Strikingly, these genes were
associated with phenotypes that affected body weight and metabolism,
identifying \textit{cis}-regulatory changes as a mechanism for adaptive
body size evolution between populations. Together, these results support
the central role of \textit{cis}-regulatory divergence in adaptive
evolution over extremely short timescales.
\end{abstract}

\dates{This manuscript was compiled on \today}
\doi{\url{www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.XXXXXXXXXX}}

\begin{document}

% Optional adjustment to line up main text (after abstract) of first page with line numbers, when using both lineno and twocolumn options.
% You should only change this length when you've finalised the article contents.
\verticaladjustment{-2pt}



\maketitle
\thispagestyle{firststyle}
\ifthenelse{\boolean{shortarticle}}{\ifthenelse{\boolean{singlecolumn}}{\abscontentformatted}{\abscontent}}{}

% If your first paragraph (i.e. with the \dropcap) contains a list environment (quote, quotation, theorem, definition, enumerate, itemize...), the line after the list may have some extra indentation. If this is the case, add \parshape=0 to the end of the list environment.

\acknow{We thank Beth Dumont for providing whole genome sequences of
MANA and SARA. We thank Yocelyn Guti√©rrez-Guerrero for providing exome
sequences from a population from Manaus, Brazil. Funding and support for
this work was provided by the National Institutes of Health (NIH; R01
GM074245 and R01 GM127468 to M.W.N.). This work used the Extreme Science
and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), which is supported by
National Science Foundation grant number ACI-1548562. M.A.B. was
supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
(DGE-1106400), a Junea W. Kelly Museum of Vertebrate Zoology Graduate
Fellowship, and a University of California Berkeley Philomathia Graduate
Fellowship. K.L.M. was supported by a Ruth Kirschstein National Research
Service Award from NIH and a Stanford Center for Computational,
Evolutionary and Human Genomics postdoctoral fellowship.}

A central goal in evolutionary biology is to understand how organisms
adapt to novel environments. Gene regulation has long been recognized to
play a major role in adaptive evolution (1, 2), especially across short
evolutionary timescales (e.g., refs. 3, 4). Yet, we still have a poor
understanding of how changes in regulatory architecture shape adaptive
evolution. \emph{Cis}-regulatory elements (e.g.~promoters, enhancers)
are predicted to be the primary substrate of adaptive evolution as they
tend to be less pleiotropic than protein-coding changes (5--8). However,
selection may favor divergence through \emph{trans}-acting mechanisms
(e.g., transcription factors), particularly when \emph{trans}-effects
modulate gene regulatory networks that are beneficial in new
environments (9, 10). \emph{Trans}-effects may also play a significant
role in plastic changes in gene expression (11--13), and selection on
genetic variation underlying plasticity may facilitate adaptation to new
environments (14, 15). However, determining the relative importance of
\emph{cis}- and \emph{trans}-changes to adaptation is challenging given
that gene regulation is highly dependent on the environment,
tissue-type, sex, and developmental stage (16--21). In most studies,
regulatory patterns are often quantified under a single context,
limiting our understanding of how gene regulatory architecture shapes
adaptive evolution in natural populations. \bigskip

The recent expansion of house mice into the Americas provides an
opportunity to address the role of gene regulatory changes in adaptive
evolution. Since their arrival from Western Europe \textasciitilde500
years ago, house mice (\emph{Mus musculus domesticus}) have rapidly
adapted to various climatic extremes through changes in morphology,
physiology, and behavior (22--26). One striking example of this is
changes in body size, as mice from more northern populations are
significantly larger than mice closer to the equator, likely reflecting
adaptation to thermal environments (26). Previous studies point to an
important role for gene regulation in driving this local adaptation.
First, genomic scans have primarily identified positive selection on
noncoding regions (23, 24), which have been linked to differences in
gene expression (24, 27). Second, changes in \emph{cis}-regulation at
specific loci have been associated with variation in body weight in
North American mice (27). Finally, gene expression plasticity has been
shown to differ between populations in response to environmental
stressors (25), suggesting a role for context-specific regulatory
divergence in local adaptation.

\begin{figure*}[t]
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figure_1.pdf}
  \caption{\textbf{Evolved differences in phenotypes and gene expression. (A)} Variation in mean annual temperature across North and South America. Wild-caught individuals were collected in upstate New York (43$^{\circ}$N) and equatorial Brazil (3$^{\circ}$S). \textbf{(B)} Genetic differences in body mass (g), pelage conductance (W\textsuperscript{-1}m\textsuperscript{-2}C\textsuperscript{-1}), tail length (mm), and ear length (mm) between New York and Brazil. Tail length and ear length are plotted relative to body mass for each individual. Individuals are represented as individual points, and boxplots indicate the 25th, median, and 75th quartiles. Results from linear mixed models are presented in upper right corners (\textit{*P} < 0.05; Table S1). Males and females show similar patterns and are combined for plotting simplicity. \textbf{(C)} Common garden experimental design. Individuals were reared under two temperatures from weaning until adults. \textbf{(D)} Principal component plots for PC1 vs PC3 based on male gene expression in BAT and liver. PC1 separates individuals based on genotype while PC3 reflects environmental differences. \textbf{(E)} Expression divergence between New York and Brazil males in warm and cold for both BAT and liver. Log2 fold changes between parents were calculated for all genes independently. In each panel, points (representing individual genes) are colored depending on their direction and significance of the log2 fold change. Insets depict the total number of differentially expressed genes for each comparison (FDR < 0.05). Females show similar patterns and are depicted in Figures S2-S3.}
\end{figure*}
\vspace{-1pt}

Here, we investigate the role of gene regulation in adaptation in house
mice from contrasting thermal environments. Specifically, using RNA-seq
data collected from liver and brown adipose tissue in males and females,
we measured gene expression in temperate and tropical mice and in their
F1 hybrids when reared under warm and cold temperatures. This allowed us
to describe the proportion of divergently expressed genes that are due
to changes in \emph{cis}, \emph{trans}, or both, and to determine the
degree to which \emph{cis}- and \emph{trans}-regulation is
context-dependent. Finally, we performed scans for selection in wild
populations of house mice to identify genomic signatures of adaptation.
We then intersect these genomic outliers with genes exhibiting
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence to identify putatively adaptive
\emph{cis}-regulatory mutations associated with local adaptation. Our
results provide insight into how gene expression is regulated across
multiple contexts and how this complex regulatory divergence within
species may contribute to adaptive evolution.

\hypertarget{results}{%
\section*{Results}\label{results}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Results}

\hypertarget{extensive-gene-expression-divergence-between-temperate-and-tropical-house-mice}{%
\subsection*{Extensive gene expression divergence between temperate and
tropical house
mice}\label{extensive-gene-expression-divergence-between-temperate-and-tropical-house-mice}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Extensive gene expression divergence
between temperate and tropical house mice}

To characterize the regulatory architecture of adaptation, we first
examined gene expression differences in mice from two drastically
different environments in the Americas: Saratoga Springs, New York, USA
(SARA), located at 43\(^{\circ}\)N, and Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil (MANA),
located near the equator at 3\(^{\circ}\)S. Saratoga Springs and Manaus
differ considerably in climate, such as mean annual temperature (Figure
1A), and mice from these environments show several phenotypic
differences consistent with climatic adaptation. Specifically, mice from
New York are larger, retain more heat through their fur, and have
shortened extremities compared to mice from Brazil (ANOVA tests,
\emph{P} \textless{} 0.05) (Figure 1B; Table S1), suggesting adaptation
to cold environments (26).

\vspace{-1pt}

We explored patterns of gene expression evolution by rearing New York
and Brazil mice under two temperatures (5\(^{\circ}\)C and
21\(^{\circ}\)C) and sequenced brown adipose tissue (BAT) and liver
transcriptomes of 48 individuals (6 / line / sex / environment) (Figure
1C). We chose these two tissues as they play important roles in both
metabolism and adaptive thermogenesis (28--30). Principal component
analysis (PCA) of all gene expression data revealed tissue type as the
largest source of variance (PC1 \textasciitilde97\% of variance
explained), followed by sex (PC2 \textasciitilde1.5\%) (Figure S1).
Within each tissue and sex, New York and Brazil mice cleanly separated
along PC1 (\textgreater60\% of variance explained), while PC3 largely
separated warm- and cold-reared mice (\textgreater4\% of variance
explained) (Figures 1D, S2). We also identified more than a third of
genes to be differentially expressed between New York and Brazil mice
(false discovery rate (FDR) \textless{} 0.05) (Figures 1E, S3-S4), with
most expression differences concordant across environments and sexes.

This strong pattern of divergence was also apparent when we categorized
differentially expressed genes as those showing genetic variation (G),
environmental variation {[}i.e., plasticity (E){]}, or genetic variation
for plasticity (i.e., GxE) (Figures 2A, S3). Genotype had
\textgreater1.5x larger effect size (calculated as the mean absolute
value of the log2 fold change) on gene expression than environment
across both tissues (Figures 2A, S3). Similar effects were identified
when we attributed expression differences to genotype and sex, though
these patterns were largely tissue-dependent (Figure S4). Overall, these
results demonstrate that within sexes and tissues, genotype plays a
larger role than either environment or GxE interactions in shaping
expression differences between temperate and tropical house mice.

\hypertarget{reduced-gene-expression-plasticity-in-cold-adapted-mice}{%
\subsection*{Reduced gene expression plasticity in cold-adapted
mice}\label{reduced-gene-expression-plasticity-in-cold-adapted-mice}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Reduced gene expression plasticity in
cold-adapted mice}

Given that New York and Brazil mice have evolved under different thermal
environments, we reasoned that gene expression responses to temperature
would differ between these lines. Roughly \textasciitilde5\% and
\textasciitilde10\% of all expressed genes showed significant GxE in
liver and BAT, respectively (FDR \textless{} 0.05) (Figures 2B, S3).
Notably, we found fewer differentially expressed genes in New York mice
(\textasciitilde5\% BAT; \textasciitilde1\% liver) than Brazil mice
(\textasciitilde10\% BAT; \textasciitilde5\% liver) (Chi-square tests,
liver and BAT: \emph{P} \textless{} 0.05), suggesting that New York mice
may be more buffered against cold stress.

Next, we explored the relationship between plastic gene expression
changes and evolved gene expression differences. Adaptive plasticity may
facilitate the colonization of new environments by moving a population
closer to the phenotypic optimum, while non-adaptive plasticity may do
the opposite (31, 32). To determine if the pronounced temperature
response of Brazil mice is adaptive or non-adaptive, we asked whether
the direction of expression plasticity of Brazil mice correlates with
expression divergence between New York and Brazil mice (see Methods). We
found that expression plasticity generally goes in the same direction as
evolved divergence for both tissues (positive Spearman's correlations,
\emph{P} \textless{} 0.05) (Figures 2C, S3), consistent with patterns of
adaptive plasticity (25, 33, 34). These results suggest that plasticity
may have facilitated the rapid expansion of house mice into new
environments.

\begin{figure}[!t]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=1\columnwidth]{./figure_2.pdf}
  \caption{\textbf{Patterns of genotype-by-environment interactions (GxE). (A)} Ternary plots depicting the proportion of each gene‚Äôs expression variance explained by genotype (G), environment (E), and GxE. The relative proportion of each factor is shown for all differentially expressed male genes in BAT and liver. Total variance is the sum of all three components. \textbf{(B)} Comparison of gene expression differences between temperature regimes in NY and BZ males in both BAT and liver. Log2 fold changes between temperatures were calculated for all genes independently. In each panel, points (representing individual genes) are colored depending on their direction and significance of the log2 fold change. GxE categories include line-specific responses or opposite responses between lines. Insets depict the total number of differentially expressed genes for each comparison (FDR < 0.05). \textbf{(C)} The relationship between gene expression plasticity and evolved divergence in BAT and liver. Points represent expression differences with statistically significant plasticity in BZ (cold vs warm; FDR < 0.05) as well as significant expression divergence between NY and BZ at warm temperature (FDR < 0.05). Points colored in orange represent genes with a positive correlation between plasticity and evolved divergence and represent adaptive plasticity. Points in black represent genes with a negative association and represent non-adaptive plasticity. Insets depict the observed correlation coefficient (orange solid lines) is more positive than a randomized distribution of correlation coefficients for each tissue (see Methods for details). Asterisks denote significance of adaptive plasticity for each tissue (binomial exact tests, \textit{P} < 0.05). Females show similar patterns and are depicted in Figures S2-S3.}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{expression-divergence-is-predominantly-due-to-cis-regulatory-changes-and-most-cis-changes-are-robust-to-environmental-temperature}{%
\subsection*{\texorpdfstring{Expression divergence is predominantly due
to \emph{cis}-regulatory changes, and most \emph{cis}-changes are robust
to environmental
temperature}{Expression divergence is predominantly due to cis-regulatory changes, and most cis-changes are robust to environmental temperature}}\label{expression-divergence-is-predominantly-due-to-cis-regulatory-changes-and-most-cis-changes-are-robust-to-environmental-temperature}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Expression divergence is predominantly
due to \emph{cis}-regulatory changes, and most \emph{cis}-changes are
robust to environmental temperature}

To investigate the gene regulatory mechanisms underlying expression
differences between New York and Brazil mice, we generated BAT and liver
RNA-seq from NY x BZ F1 hybrids reared in both warm and cold
environments (Figures 1C, S5). Measuring gene expression in F1 hybrids
allowed us to discern if parental gene expression differences are due to
\emph{cis}- and/or \emph{trans}-acting changes by assessing patterns of
allele-specific expression (ASE) (Figure 3A). Specifically, as F1
hybrids inherit both a Brazil allele and New York allele within in the
same \emph{trans}-acting environment, differences in expression between
alleles are indicative of one or more \emph{cis}-acting elements
(35--37). In contrast, if no ASE is detected in hybrids but differences
are observed between parental lines, we can infer divergence is likely
due to \emph{trans}-acting factors (35--37).

\begin{figure*}[t]
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figure_3.pdf}
  \caption{\textbf{The relative distribution of regulatory changes between New York and Brazil house mice across environments and tissues. (A)} Schematic depicting how \textit{cis}- and \textit{trans}-changes can be inferred with F1 hybrids, and how environmental differences may result in \textit{cis} x temperature and \textit{trans} x temperature effects. Blue and gold boxes represent \textit{cis}-regulatory regions for NY and BZ, respectively. Wavy lines depict transcript levels of an allele. TF = transcription factor. \textbf{(B)} Points (individual genes) represent log2 fold changes between reads mapping to each allele in the hybrid (BZ allele / NY allele; y-axis) and the reads mapping to each parental line (BZ parent / NY parent; x-axis). Genes are colored based on their inferred regulatory category: orange = $\textit{cis}$, purple = $\textit{trans}$, green = $\textit{cis}  \& \textit{trans}$, gray = conserved or ambiguous. Genes categorized as conserved or ambiguous (gray points) constitute roughly $75\%$ of all genes and are centered on the origin and mostly hidden behind other genes. \textbf{(C)} Changes in the number of genes for each inferred regulatory category between temperature regimes are illustrated in the alluvial plot. Genes that were conserved or ambiguous (gray) at both temperatures are not shown.}
\end{figure*}

We tested 5,898 genes for ASE based on the presence of fixed differences
between parental Brazil and New York lines (see Methods). While most
genes showed conserved gene regulation between New York and Brazil mice
(\textasciitilde75\%), genes with evidence for expression divergence
tended to involve changes in \emph{cis} (Figure 3B). Specifically, 7-8\%
of genes showed expression divergence due to \emph{cis} alone and 5-6\%
genes showed evidence of divergence due to \emph{cis} and \emph{trans}
(Figure 3B). Only \textasciitilde5\% of genes involved regulatory
changes solely in \emph{trans} (Figure 3B). Moreover, the magnitude of
\emph{cis}-effects were greater than \emph{trans}-effects per gene
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test, \emph{P} \textless{} 2.2 x
10\textsuperscript{-16}). The predominance of \emph{cis}-regulatory
changes relative to \emph{trans}-changes is consistent with previous
studies in house mice (38--40).

We next asked how the environment modulates gene regulatory evolution by
comparing patterns of \emph{cis}- and \emph{trans}-regulatory
differences across environments. Similar to expression patterns observed
in the parents, the majority of genes that could be categorized across
temperature treatments showed the same regulatory control in both
environments (\textasciitilde88\%) (Figure 3C). For the genes that did
show a change in regulatory control, we found that \emph{cis}-regulatory
changes were more insensitive to temperature than \emph{trans}-changes.
Comparing the difference in magnitude of the \emph{cis}- and
\emph{trans}-differences between warm and cold conditions, we found that
\emph{trans}-differences were greater between environments for both
tissues (Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, \emph{P} \textless{} 2.2 x
10\textsuperscript{-16}) (Figure S6). The cold environment also had a
lower proportion of genes with \emph{trans}-divergence (Chi-square
tests; BAT, \emph{P}=0.0003; liver, \emph{P}=0.02), where the proportion
of genes with only \emph{cis}-divergence was the same across temperature
conditions (Chi-square tests; BAT, \emph{P}=0.51; liver, \emph{P}=0.66).
These results suggest that \emph{trans}-effects play a larger role in
gene expression plasticity than \emph{cis}-effects.

\hypertarget{a-small-number-of-genes-show-temperature-dependent-cis-regulation}{%
\subsection*{\texorpdfstring{A small number of genes show
temperature-dependent
\emph{cis}-regulation}{A small number of genes show temperature-dependent cis-regulation}}\label{a-small-number-of-genes-show-temperature-dependent-cis-regulation}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{A small number of genes show
temperature-dependent \emph{cis}-regulation}

While most \emph{cis}-effects were robust to temperature, we were
specifically interested in exploring whether any genes showed
temperature-dependent \emph{cis}-effects. Such genes are of particular
interest since they correspond to \emph{plasticity}-eQTL (i.e., loci
that harbor mutations underlying a plastic response)(41). To identify
genes for which there was a significant effect of temperature on
regulatory divergence, we determined if either the \emph{cis} and/or the
\emph{trans} component showed a significant interaction with temperature
(see Methods). We identified \emph{cis} x temperature effects for 11
genes in BAT (\emph{gstt1}, \emph{wars2}, \emph{hsd11b1}, \emph{itih5},
\emph{dst}, \emph{tmed2}, \emph{plbd1}, \emph{cdh13}, \emph{scd1},
\emph{tmem45b}, \emph{s100a13}) and 4 in the liver (\emph{elovl3},
\emph{hmgcs2}, \emph{wars2}, \emph{ebpl}) (FDR \textless{} 0.1). Most of
these genes showed differences in the magnitude of ASE between
temperatures, but we also observed cases where ASE was induced by one
temperature treatment (i.e., \emph{wars2}, \emph{tmed2}, \emph{cdh13},
\emph{s100a13}, \emph{ebpl}, \emph{hmgcs2}). Over half of the genes
corresponding to \emph{plasticity}-eQTL showed a smaller plastic
response in New York than in Brazil, consistent with the overall
reduction in expression plasticity in cold-adapted mice. We also
identified a small number of genes with significant \emph{trans} x
temperature effects in BAT (18 genes) and liver (1 gene) (FDR
\textless{} 0.1) (Table S2). Several of these genes with
temperature-induced regulatory differences have suggested roles in
energy metabolism and thermal tolerance (e.g., refs 42, 43--45). The
identification of temperature-dependent gene regulatory effects
(especially \emph{plasticity}-eQTL) indicates a role for evolved changes
in plasticity between temperate and tropical mice.

\hypertarget{regulatory-changes-are-largely-tissue-specific-and-are-enriched-for-body-size-and-metabolism}{%
\subsection*{\texorpdfstring{\textit{Cis}-regulatory changes are largely
tissue-specific and are enriched for body size and
metabolism}{-regulatory changes are largely tissue-specific and are enriched for body size and metabolism}}\label{regulatory-changes-are-largely-tissue-specific-and-are-enriched-for-body-size-and-metabolism}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{\textit{Cis}-regulatory changes are
largely tissue-specific and are enriched for body size and metabolism}

While both liver and BAT play essential roles in metabolism and
thermogenesis, these tissues have distinct functional properties that
differentiate their role in environmental adaptation. In both tissues,
genes with evidence for \emph{cis}-divergence were enriched for GO terms
related to metabolic processes, as well as the pathway for metabolism
(Reactome R-MMU-1430728; liver, FDR=6.55 x 10\textsuperscript{-8}; BAT,
FDR=1.49 x 10\textsuperscript{-8}). Genes with \emph{cis}-regulatory
changes in the liver were enriched for several mutant phenotype
annotations for homeostasis and metabolism, including abnormal lipid
homeostasis (FDR=6.248 x 10\textsuperscript{-5}), abnormal cholesterol
level (FDR=0.003), abnormal energy expenditure (FDR=0.001), and abnormal
triglyceride level (FDR=0.008). Additionally, genes with
\emph{cis}-changes in the liver showed a greater than 2-fold enrichment
of genes with mutant phenotypes for abnormal susceptibility to weight
gain (FDR=0.014) and were nominally significantly enriched for several
other phenotypes related to body weight, size, and composition (Figure
S7). Interestingly, two genes (\emph{bcat2}, \emph{adam17}) exhibiting
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence were previously implicated in body
weight differences in North American populations (27), further
supporting their role in adaptive divergence between house mouse
populations.

Next, we assessed the extent to which regulatory control is
tissue-biased. Comparing gene expression evolution in BAT and liver, we
found regulatory divergence to be largely tissue-biased. The majority of
genes (80\%) for which we could assign a regulatory category in each
tissue were assigned to a different regulatory category in the other
tissue (2954/3672 genes). In particular, we found that
\emph{trans}-divergence was more likely to be restricted to one tissue
(with expression conserved between lines in the other tissue), compared
to \emph{cis}-changes which were more often shared (\textgreater2-fold
more) (Chi-square test \emph{P} \textless{} 0.0001). This may reflect
the general observation of increased tissue-specificity of
\emph{trans}-effects relative to \emph{cis}-effects (46).

To formally identify tissue-biased ASE, we contrasted ASE measurements
in BAT and liver for paired hybrid samples (see Methods). We identified
338 genes with evidence for differential allele-specific expression
between tissues (Figure S8). While the majority of these genes (77\%)
showed significant allele-specific expression in just one tissue, we
also identified cases where allele-specific expression was present in
both tissues but with differences in expression magnitude or direction
(23\%). Of these genes, forty-three had discordant allele-specific
expression between tissues, where the opposite parental allele was
up-regulated between tissues. Genes with tissue-biased ASE were enriched
for metabolic phenotypes (e.g., abnormal lipid homeostasis, FDR=0.00027;
increased food intake, FDR=0.036) and tissue specific functions and
physiology (e.g., abnormal adipose tissue physiology, FDR=0.007;
abnormal liver morphology, FDR=0.00097). These results highlight the
importance of tissue-specific gene regulation in population divergence.

\hypertarget{positive-selection-on-genes-with-cis-regulatory-divergence-in-wild-house-mouse-populations}{%
\subsection*{\texorpdfstring{Positive selection on genes with
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence in wild house mouse
populations}{Positive selection on genes with cis-regulatory divergence in wild house mouse populations}}\label{positive-selection-on-genes-with-cis-regulatory-divergence-in-wild-house-mouse-populations}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Positive selection on genes with
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence in wild house mouse populations}

As \emph{cis}-regulatory variants are often drivers of local adaptation
(4, 47, 48), and because most regulatory divergence between New York and
Brazil house mice is governed in \emph{cis}, we next explored whether
genes regulated in \emph{cis} are under positive selection in wild mice
from the Americas. To test this, we utilized previously published whole
exome data from wild-caught individuals collected from New
Hampshire/Vermont, USA (NH/VT) (24) and Manaus, Brazil (MAN)
(Guti√©rrez-Guerrero et al., \emph{in prep}), and compared these data to
previously published whole genome data from Eurasian populations of
house mice (49). Genetic PCA distinguished mice based on subspecies and
population-of-origin (Figures 4A, S9), with mice from NH/VT clustering
most closely with mice from Germany. These results are consistent with
the suggestion that mice from eastern North America are most closely
related to populations in northern Europe (50, 51).

\begin{figure*}[t]
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figure_4.pdf}
  \caption{\textbf{Genomic outliers are enriched in genes with evidence for} \textbf{\textit{cis}-regulatory divergence. (A)} Genetic PCA of wild house mice distinguished mouse populations based on population-of-origin (\textit{Mus musculus domesticus} (M.m.d.)) and subspecies (\textit{Mus musculus castaneus} (M.m.c.), \textit{Mus musculus musculus} (M.m.m.)). The x and y axes show the first and second SNP eigenvectors, respectively (EV; PC1: 29\% of variance, PC2: 8\% of variance. \textbf{(B)} Autosomal selection scan showing \textit{PBSn1} results for the New Hampshire/Vermont (NH/VT) focal population. Orange points depict genes that exhibit \textit{cis}-regulatory divergence and overlap with outlier regions. \textbf{(C)} Gene set enrichment analysis for genes with ASE that overlap genomic outliers in the NH/VT population. ASE outliers were highly enriched for mouse phenotypes related to body size differences and metabolic features, across both temperature treatments. \textbf{(D)} Candidate gene that exhibits \textit{cis}-regulatory divergence and overlaps with outlier region. Allele frequencies (pie charts) of significant SNPs (gold asterisks) in the four populations.}
\end{figure*}

Next, to identify genetic signatures of adaptation in house mice from
the Americas, we performed a scan for regions of genetic differentiation
consistent with selection using a normalized version of the population
branch statistic (\emph{PBSn1}). We used this test to identify highly
differentiated loci in our focal populations in the Americas (MAN and
NH/VT) relative to Eurasian populations (see Methods). In total, 83,538
and 84,420 non-overlapping 5-SNP windows were analyzed for Manaus and
NH/VT, respectively. Outlier windows in NH/VT and MAN overlapped 538 and
530 genes, respectively (File S1).

Finally, we asked to what extent genomic divergence among wild mice from
temperate and tropical environments is associated with
\emph{cis}-regulatory changes. Specifically, if natural selection
associated with climatic adaptation has acted mainly on regulatory
variants, we predicted an enrichment of \emph{PBSn1} outliers near genes
displaying ASE (e.g., ref. 52). To test this prediction, we overlapped
candidate regions for selection based on \emph{PBSn1} outlier windows
with genes for which we identified evidence for allele-specific
expression in BAT or liver. In NH/VT, we found outlier windows
overlapped 71 and 62 genes with evidence for \emph{cis}-regulatory
divergence under warm and cold conditions, respectively (overlap 44
genes) (Figure 4B; File S1). The overlap between genes with
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence and outlier windows in this population
was greater than expected by chance (hypergeometric test,
\emph{P}=0.0016) and genes with allele-specific expression were
associated with higher average \emph{PBSn1} scores than background genes
(\emph{P}=0.00026, see Methods). ASE outliers were enriched for mutant
phenotypes related to body size, growth, and metabolism relative to
other genes with \emph{cis}-regulatory divergence (e.g., abnormal
postnatal growth/weight/body size, abnormal susceptibility to weight
gain, decreased susceptibility to diet-induced obesity, and increased
energy expenditure; FDR \textless{} 0.05) (Figure 4C; File S1). This
gene set also includes genes whose expression in the liver was
previously associated with body mass variation in natural populations of
North American house mice (\emph{bcat2}, \emph{col6a1}, \emph{col5a2},
\emph{col3a1}) (24, 27). Additionally, this set included genes
implicated in obesity and metabolic phenotypes in humans (e.g.,
\emph{wrn}, \emph{plaat3}, \emph{prkar2b}, \emph{sulf2}, \emph{smoc1})
(Figure 4D) (53) and mice (Table S3). Together, these results suggest
that selection has acted on \emph{cis}-regulatory genes related to
metabolism and body weight in New York mice.

In contrast, we did not find significant overlap between genes with
allele-specific expression and \emph{PBSn1} outliers for Manaus
(\emph{P}=0.4). Outlier windows overlapped 49 and 51 genes with evidence
for \emph{cis}-regulatory divergence under warm and cold conditions,
respectively (Figure S10). Genes were not enriched for metabolic process
terms or phenotypes. The significant overlap between \emph{PBSn1}
outliers and ASE in the temperate mice but not in the tropical mice
suggests that adaptive gene expression differences may predominantly
reflect adaptation to cold environments (rather than to warm
environments).

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section*{Discussion}\label{discussion}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Discussion}

Understanding how both genetic and non-genetic factors influence gene
expression is essential to understanding adaptive evolution. Here, we
utilized allele-specific expression in liver and brown adipose tissue to
characterize \emph{cis} and \emph{trans} changes underlying expression
differences between temperate and tropical house mice when reared under
warm and cold laboratory environments. We found that most regulatory
divergence was governed by \emph{cis}-regulatory variation, and that
these \emph{cis}-effects were largely independent of environmental
temperature. However, a subset of genes showed temperature-dependent
\emph{cis}-effects and thus represent QTL for expression plasticity. We
also found that many \emph{cis}-regulated genes were associated with
metabolism and body size, but that these \emph{cis}-effects were often
tissue-biased. Finally, overlap of genes exhibiting
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence with scans for selection identified
several \emph{cis}-regulatory genes under positive selection, consistent
with a role for these loci in local adaptation. The combination of
allele-specific expression with genomic scans is a fruitful approach to
identify the regulatory architecture of adaptive evolution in natural
populations.

Comparisons between New York and Brazil house mice provide insights into
the evolution of gene regulation over very short evolutionary
timescales. Although New York and Brazil house mice colonized the
Americas only within the last \textasciitilde500 years, we find evidence
for pervasive regulatory divergence. Moreover, the regulatory control
underlying this intraspecific divergence is overwhelmingly due to
\emph{cis} variants either alone or together with one or more
\emph{trans} variants. The predominance of \emph{cis}-regulatory
divergence is in agreement with previous interspecific studies in house
mice (38, 40, 54), and has been observed in intraspecific comparisons of
other species (55--61). Although some evidence suggests
\emph{trans}-effects play larger roles within rather than between
species (62--66), it is likely that certain evolutionary contexts,
timescales, and selection pressures may favor either \emph{cis}- or
\emph{trans}-acting mechanisms (67, 68). Regardless, our study indicates
that strong intraspecific \emph{cis}-regulatory divergence between
populations can accrue on extremely short timescales.

Despite the plastic response of gene expression in both New York and
Brazil house mice, \emph{cis}-regulatory divergence was relatively
robust to environmental temperature. In contrast, changes in the
environment preferentially affected \emph{trans}-regulation profiles,
suggesting that \emph{trans}-effects play a more pronounced role in gene
expression plasticity. Greater sensitivity of \emph{trans}-effects to
the environment is in strong agreement with previous studies (11, 12,
41, 57, 69--71) and may be due to the role \emph{trans}-acting factors
play in signaling pathways that become activated in response to
environmental change (72). Indeed, we found that the effect sizes of
\emph{trans} were greater than those of \emph{cis} across environments,
indicating that much of expression plasticity we observed is governed by
changes in \emph{trans}. Moreover, the pronounced expression plasticity
we observe in Brazil house mice largely goes in the same direction as
evolved divergence (i.e., adaptive plasticity)(33, 34). Previous studies
in house mice have implicated the role of adaptive gene expression
plasticity in local adaptation (25), suggesting that plasticity in
general may have aided in the colonization of new environments.

Although ASE was generally observed at both temperatures for a given
gene, a subset of genes showed temperature-dependent \emph{cis}-effects.
These loci are of particular interest since these constitute
\emph{plasticity}-eQTL and harbor mutations that directly affect
plasticity of gene expression. Genetic assimilation refers to the
conversion of a plastic response to a fixed response (73--76). If the
ancestral allele at a \emph{plasticity}-eQTL encodes a plastic response
and the derived allele encodes a fixed response, then the
\emph{plasticity}-eQTL represents a case of genetic assimilation. For
example, selection in a cold, temperate environment may have led to the
reduced plasticity exhibited in New York mice. A similar mechanism was
recently proposed to underlie rapid divergence in threespine stickleback
(57). \emph{Cis}-regulatory variants could rapidly canalize expression
through the loss or gain of specific binding sites for conditionally
expressed transcription factors, thereby decoupling a gene's expression
from the environment (72). Many of the \emph{cis} x environment
candidates illustrate potential regulatory mechanisms underlying genetic
assimilation as many of them exhibit reduced plasticity in New York mice
(Figure S11). For example, \emph{scd1} plays an important role in basal
and cold-induced thermogenesis (77, 78) and New York mice show higher
and constitutive average expression of \emph{scd1} in BAT compared to
Brazil mice (Figure S11). Further study of these genes may help us
understand the relationship between adaptive plasticity and genetic
adaptation to novel environments.

Finally, we discovered significant overlap between genes exhibiting
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence and genomic SNPs that show evidence for
positive selection in wild mice, suggesting that selection has acted
mainly on regulatory variants associated with local adaptation. This
overlapping gene set is enriched for mutant phenotypes related to body
size and metabolism in New York mice and are consistent with previous
studies showing selection on genes with \emph{cis}-eQTLs related to body
size in North American mice (27). Together, our results highlight how
natural selection on \emph{cis}-regulatory divergence is a likely
contributor to rapid climatic adaptation in house mice.

\hypertarget{materials-and-methods}{%
\section*{Materials and Methods}\label{materials-and-methods}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Materials and Methods}

\hypertarget{animals-and-evolved-phenotypic-differences}{%
\subsubsection*{Animals and Evolved Phenotypic
Differences}\label{animals-and-evolved-phenotypic-differences}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Animals and Evolved Phenotypic
Differences}

To characterize evolved phenotypic differences between New York and
Brazil house mice, we used two wild-derived inbred lines of house mice:
SARA (New York) and MANA (Brazil). The establishment of these lines has
been described previously (26). Mice from each line were housed in a
standard laboratory environment at 21\(^{\circ}\)C with a 12L:12D cycle.
Roughly equal numbers of males and females were produced for each
within-line comparison (\emph{n} = 32 per line; File S1). We took
standard museum measurements on all mice and removed and prepared dried
skins. Thermal conductance of pelage (referred to as pelage conductance
(W\textsuperscript{-1}m\textsuperscript{-2}C\textsuperscript{-1})) was
measured on dry skins following the protocol of Riddell et al.~2021 (see
SI Methods) (79). Tail length and ear length were corrected for body
mass for each individual. Effects of line and sex for each phenotype
were modeled using ANOVA. All statistical analyses were performed using
packages available in R (v.4.1.1).

\hypertarget{experimental-design-and-tissue-collection}{%
\subsubsection*{Experimental Design and Tissue
Collection}\label{experimental-design-and-tissue-collection}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Experimental Design and Tissue
Collection}

To investigate the gene regulatory mechanisms underlying local
adaptation in house mice, we generated F1 hybrids by crossing a SARA
female with a MANA male. All experimental animals were born at room
temperature (21\(^{\circ}\)C) and were provided water and commercial
rodent chow \emph{ad libitum}. We weaned and singly housed SARA, MANA,
and F1 hybrids at \textasciitilde3 weeks of age. We split 3.5-week-old
full-sibs and F1 hybrids into size-matched experimental groups across
cold (5\(^{\circ}\)C) and warm (21\(^{\circ}\)C) treatments. Mice were
kept in their respective experimental environment until
\textasciitilde12 weeks of age, at which point individuals were
euthanized via cervical dislocation. We took standard museum
measurements and then rapidly dissected and preserved liver and brown
adipose tissue in RNAlater at 4\(^{\circ}\)C overnight and moved to
-80\(^{\circ}\)C until RNA extraction. We prepared standard museum
skeletons and accessioned them in UC Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology (catalog numbers are given in File S1). All experimental
procedures were in accordance with the UC Berkeley Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (AUP-2017-08-10248).

\hypertarget{rna-extraction-library-preparation-and-sequencing}{%
\subsubsection*{RNA Extraction, Library Preparation, and
Sequencing}\label{rna-extraction-library-preparation-and-sequencing}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{RNA Extraction, Library
Preparation, and Sequencing}

We extracted total RNA from liver and BAT from each sample (\emph{n} =
\textasciitilde6 per genotype/sex/treatment/tissue) using the RNeasy
PowerLyzer Kit (QIAGEN). We generated Illumina cDNA libraries from 1
\(\mu\)g of purified RNA using KAPA Stranded mRNA-Seq Kit (Illumina),
and uniquely indexed libraries using unique dual indexes (Illumina).
Libraries were pooled in equal molar concentration and sequenced on one
lane each of 150 bp paired-end NovaSeq S1 and NovaSeq S4 at the Vincent
J. Coates Genomics Sequencing Center at UC Berkeley. We filtered raw
reads below a Phred quality score of 15 and trimmed adapter sequences
using fastp (80).

\hypertarget{parental-gene-expression-analyses}{%
\subsubsection*{Parental Gene Expression
Analyses}\label{parental-gene-expression-analyses}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Parental Gene Expression Analyses}

After cleaning and trimming parental sequences of MANA and SARA, we
mapped reads to the \emph{Mus musculus} reference genome (GRCm38/mm10)
using STAR (81). We counted reads overlapping exons using HTSeq (82)
based on the Ensembl GRCm38.98 annotation. We imported raw count data
into R (v.4.1.1) and transformed expression values using variance
stabilizing transformation (83) to assess transcriptome-wide expression
patterns via PCA. Next, we removed genes with fewer than an average of
10 reads per individual within each tissue, retaining \textasciitilde14K
expressed genes per tissue for downstream analyses. We then used DESeq2
(83) on raw, filtered reads to quantify expression patterns by fitting a
generalized linear model following a negative binomial distribution. We
computed differential expression between lines with the model population
+ environment + population*environment to determine the effects of
genotype, environment, and genotype-by-environment on expression
patterns for each tissue and sex, separately. We also identified
genotype-by-sex interactions using a similar model in DESeq2 (see SI
Methods and Results).

To determine if gene expression plasticity is correlated with gene
expression divergence, we compared genes with significant plasticity to
genes with significant expression divergence within each tissue and sex,
separately. We used Spearman's rank correlation coefficients to assess
overall directionality and significance of gene expression. To account
for potential statistical artifacts (84), we compared the observed
correlations to a permuted distribution (10,000 permutations). Lastly,
we used a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple test correction (85) on all
resulting \textit{P}-values and considered genes with FDR \textless{}
0.05 to be significantly differentially expressed.

\hypertarget{identifying-variants-between-parental-lines}{%
\subsubsection*{Identifying Variants between Parental
Lines}\label{identifying-variants-between-parental-lines}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Identifying Variants between
Parental Lines}

To identify differences between lines for allele-specific read
assignment, we performed SNP calling on whole genome sequence data from
one female each of MANA and SARA. We mapped genomic reads with Bowtie2
(86) to the mm10 reference genome (setting: --very-sensitive) obtained
from Ensembl. We marked duplicates with the Picard tool MarkDuplicates
and then we used the GATK tools HaplotypeCaller and GenotypeGVCFs for
joint genotyping across genomic samples. We filtered for low quality SNP
calls with VariantFiltration (QD \textless{} 2.0; QUAL \textless{} 30.0;
FS \textgreater{} 200; ReadPosRankSum \textless{} -20.0). To reduce the
influence of genotyping error on allele-specific expression, we mapped
RNA-seq reads from all individuals and then counted allele-specific
reads aligned to each site we genotyped with the GATK tool
ASEReadCounter. We excluded sites for which we did not have coverage of
at least 5 reads from each population-specific allele. These SNPs were
then used for identifying allele-specific reads.

\hypertarget{mapping-allele-specific-reads}{%
\subsubsection*{Mapping Allele-Specific
Reads}\label{mapping-allele-specific-reads}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Mapping Allele-Specific Reads}

For allele-specific expression analyses, we mapped reads from hybrid
individuals to the mouse reference genome (GRCm38/mm10) using STAR. We
used WASP (87) to reduce the potential for reference mapping bias. We
retained reads that overlapped a population-specific variant and that
passed WASP filtering for our allele-specific expression analysis. We
separated reads overlapping informative variants into allele-specific
pools (NY, BZ) based on genotype for quantification. We used HTSeq to
count the number of reads associated with each gene per population based
on the overlap of reads and annotated exonic regions based on the
Ensembl GRCm38.98 annotation. We examined per site allelic reads with
ASEReadCounter to quantify allele-specific mapping over individual
sites. Proportions of reads overlapping the references vs.~alternative
allele (REF allele / (ALT allele + REF allele)) showed a median 0.5
across samples (Figure S12), indicating no evidence for reference
mapping bias.

\hypertarget{identifying-cis-and-trans-regulatory-divergene}{%
\subsubsection*{\texorpdfstring{Identifying \emph{Cis}- and
\emph{Trans}-Regulatory
Divergence}{Identifying Cis- and Trans-Regulatory Divergence}}\label{identifying-cis-and-trans-regulatory-divergene}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Identifying \emph{Cis}- and
\emph{Trans}-Regulatory Divergence}

Parental (F0) and F1 expression data was used to characterize \emph{cis}
and \emph{trans} effects. To categorize regulatory divergence at each
gene, we inferred differential expression by analyzing raw counts using
DESeq2. To identify genes with evidence of allele-specific expression in
hybrid individuals, we took reads that mapped preferentially to either
New York or Brazil alleles and fit these to a model with allele (NY
vs.~BZ), sample (individual), and tissue (BAT, liver) for hybrid male
samples in DESeq2 (Wald-test). As read counts come from the same
sequencing library, library size factor normalization was disabled in
DESeq2 by setting SizeFactors = 1 for measures of allele-specific
expression. We used males to assign regulatory categories to maximize
power due to a larger number of hybrid samples sequenced (6 replicates
of males vs.~4 replicates of females). Differential expression between
alleles in the F1 is evidence for \emph{cis}-regulatory divergence,
where differential expression in the F0 generation is not recapitulated
between alleles in the F1 is evidence for \emph{trans} divergence. The
\emph{trans} component (T) was assessed through a Fisher's Exact Test on
reads mapping to each parental allele in the hybrid vs.~parental read
counts, summed over all replicates (37, 62). Reads were randomly
down-sampled to account for library size differences between parental
and F1 replicates (88, 89). \emph{P}-values for each test were corrected
for FDR with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Genes were sorted into
categories based on hard FDR thresholds (FDR \textless{} 0.05) (37, 62),
as described below. We analyzed temperature treatments (warm and cold)
separately for regulatory assignment and then compared as described
below:\\
\indent \textit{Conserved}: no significant difference between lines
(F0), no significant difference between alleles (F1), no significant
\textit{T}.\\
\indent \textit{Cis} only: significant difference between lines (F0),
significant difference between alleles (F1), no significant
\textit{T}.\\
\indent \textit{Trans} only: significant difference between lines (F0),
no significant difference between alleles (F1), significant
\textit{T}.\\
\indent \emph{Cis} {\&} \emph{Trans} designations: significant
differences between alleles (F1) and significant \textit{T}. This
category was further subdivided into \emph{cis} + \emph{trans}
(reinforcing), \emph{cis} + \emph{trans} (opposing),
\textit{compensatory}, and \emph{cis} x \emph{trans}, as previously
described (38, 40).\\
\indent \emph{Ambiguous}: all other patterns.

We identified \emph{cis} x temperature interactions using DESeq2 under a
model specifying temperature (cold vs.~warm) and allele (BZ vs.~NY). To
identify \emph{trans} x temperature interactions, we fit a model that
included parental and hybrid read counts for temperature (cold
vs.~warm), allele/genotype (BZ vs.~NY), and generation (F1 vs.~F0) and
interactions. Similar models were also used to identify sex-specific
regulatory patterns in DESeq2 (see SI Methods and Results).

\hypertarget{genetic-PCA-of-m.m-domesticus-populations}{%
\subsubsection*{\texorpdfstring{Genetic PCA of \emph{M.m. domesticus}
populations}{Genetic PCA of M.m. domesticus populations}}\label{genetic-PCA-of-m.m-domesticus-populations}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Genetic PCA of \emph{M.m.
domesticus} populations}

We used SNPRelate (90) to perform PCA and IBS hierarchical clustering of
population genetic data. Genomic data from 3 Eurasian populations of
\emph{M. m. domesticus} (Germany {[}Cologne-Bonn{]}, France, and Iran)
and \emph{M. m. musculus} and \emph{M. m. castaneus} subspecies were
downloaded from \url{http://wwwuser.gwdg.de/~evolbio/evolgen/wildmouse/}
(49). For PCA, biallelic variants genotyped across all these individuals
were extracted and pruned for linkage disequilibrium in SNPRelate
(thresholds=0.2) resulting in 22,126 variant sites for PCA and IBS
clustering for \emph{M. m. domesticus} comparisons and 25,467 variants
for global \emph{Mus} comparisons (Figures 4A, S9). Altering the pruning
threshold to 0.5 did not result in any change in population clustering.

\hypertarget{autosomal-scans-for-selection}{%
\subsubsection*{Autosomal Scans for
Selection}\label{autosomal-scans-for-selection}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Autosomal Scans for Selection}

To identify regions with evidence for selection in the Americas, we
scanned the exomes of our North and South American focal populations for
selection by using a modification of the population branch statistic
(PBS) which summarizes a three-way comparison of allele frequencies
between a focal group, a closely related population, and an outgroup
comparison (\emph{PBSn1}) (91, 92):
\[ PBSn1 = {PBS_1 \over 1 + PBS_1 + PBS_2 + PBS_3}  \]

Here, \emph{PBS1} indicates PBS calculated as either Manaus or NH/VT as
the focal population, and \emph{PBS2} and \emph{PBS3} indicate PBS
calculated for Eurasians populations as the focal populations (France or
Germany and Iran, respectively). To maximize the number of sites that
could be compared, American populations are not directly compared in the
branch test due to the reduced representation of exome data and high per
site Fst values between the two populations (Figure S13). Instead, NH/VT
and MAN were each compared to two Eurasian populations {[}((MAN),
France) Iran) and ((NH/VT) Germany) Iran){]}, selected based on
population clustering (Figure S9). We restricted our SNP set to
biallelic variants across the 3 populations being compared and required
that at least six individuals in the focal branch be genotyped. We note
that the NH/VT sample used in the PBS test is geographically close to
the origin of the SARA line.

We used VCFtools (93) to calculate Weir and Cockerham Fst at each
variant position. These values were used to calculate \emph{PBSn1} for
non-overlapping blocks of 5 SNPs. We consider blocks in the top 1\% of
\emph{PBSn1} scores outliers and do not attempt to assign
\emph{P}-values to each SNP-block (94). Outliers were \textgreater3
standard deviations above the mean windowed value of SNP-blocks in each
comparison (MAN focal, median=0.045; NH/VT focal median = 0.064). We
identified windows overlapping genes based on Ensembl gene coordinates
(mm10) and the BEDTools ``intersect'' tool (95). As allele-specific
expression in F1s is consistent with local independent genetic changes
influencing gene expression, we focused on genes with evidence for
\emph{cis}-regulatory divergence (i.e., differences in expression
between parental alleles in the F1) for overlap with outlier loci. To
ask whether allele-specific expression was associated with elevated
\emph{PBSn1} scores, we used a generalized linear model incorporating
gene category (ASE or no ASE) and SNP density per kb as factors to
\emph{PBSn1} scores. SNP density was calculated by dividing the number
of informative sites between NY and BZ for allele-specific expression
per gene by transcript length.

\hypertarget{enrichment-analyses}{%
\subsubsection*{Enrichment Analyses}\label{enrichment-analyses}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Enrichment Analyses}

We performed all GO and pathway enrichment analyses with PANTHER (96,
97). Phenotype enrichment analyses were performed with ModPhea (98). We
annotated genes to specific phenotypes based on Mouse Genome Informatics
phenotype annotations (\url{http://www.informatics.jax.org/}).

\hypertarget{data-availability}{%
\subsubsection*{Data Availability}\label{data-availability}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsubsection}{Data Availability}

Scripts are available on
GitHub(\url{https://github.com/malballinger/BallingerMack_NYBZase_2022}).
All sequence data generated in this study have been deposited to the
National Center for Biotechnology Information Sequence Read Archive
under accession BioProject ID PRJNAXXX. All other data are included in
the article and/or SI Appendix.

\showmatmethods
\showacknow
\pnasbreak

\hypertarget{references}{%
\section*{References}\label{references}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{References}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\begin{CSLReferences}{0}{0}
\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-King1975}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{1. }
\CSLRightInline{King MC, Wilson AC (1975) Evolution at two levels in
humans and chimpanzees. \emph{Science} 188(4184):107--116.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wray2003}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{2. }
\CSLRightInline{Wray GA, et al. (2003) The evolution of transcriptional
regulation in eukaryotes. \emph{Mol Biol Evol} 20(9):1377--1419.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Jones2012}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{3. }
\CSLRightInline{Jones FC, et al. (2012) The genomic basis of adaptive
evolution in threespine sticklebacks. \emph{Nature} 484(7392):55--61.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fraser2013}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{4. }
\CSLRightInline{Fraser HB (2013) Gene expression drives local adaptation
in humans. \emph{Genome Res} 23(7):1089--1096.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wray2007}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{5. }
\CSLRightInline{Wray GA (2007) The evolutionary significance of
\emph{cis}-regulatory mutations. \emph{Nat Rev Genet} 8(3):206--216.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wittkopp2011}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{6. }
\CSLRightInline{Wittkopp PJ, Kalay G (2011) \emph{Cis}-regulatory
elements: Molecular mechanisms and evolutionary processes underlying
divergence. \emph{Nat Rev Genet} 13(1):59--69.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Carroll2008}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{7. }
\CSLRightInline{Carroll SB (2008) Evo-devo and an expanding evolutionary
synthesis: A genetic theory of morphological evolution. \emph{Cell}
134(1):25--36.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Stern2008}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{8. }
\CSLRightInline{Stern DL, Orgogozo V (2008) The loci of evolution: How
predictable is genetic evolution? \emph{Evolution} 62(9):2155--2177.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Cooper2003}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{9. }
\CSLRightInline{Cooper TF, Rozen DE, Lenski RE (2003) Parallel changes
in gene expression after 20,000 generations of evolution in
\emph{escherichia coli}. \emph{Proc Natl Acad Sci} 100(3):1072--1077.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Stern2009}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{10. }
\CSLRightInline{Stern DL, Orgogozo V (2009) Is genetic evolution
predictable? \emph{Science} 323(5915):746--751.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Smith2008}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{11. }
\CSLRightInline{Smith EN, Kruglyak L (2008) Gene-environment interaction
in yeast gene expression. \emph{PLoS Biol} 6(4):e83.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Tirosh2009}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{12. }
\CSLRightInline{Tirosh I, Reikhav S, Levy AA, Barkai N (2009) A yeast
hybrid provides insight into the evolution of gene expression
regulation. \emph{Science} 324(5927):659--662.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Promislow2005}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{13. }
\CSLRightInline{Promislow D (2005) A regulatory network analysis of
phenotypic plasticity in yeast. \emph{Am Nat} 165(5):515--523.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-West-Eberhard2003}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{14. }
\CSLRightInline{West-Eberhard MJ (2003) \emph{Developmental plasticity
and evolution} (Oxford University Press).}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-West-Eberhard2005}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{15. }
\CSLRightInline{West-Eberhard MJ (2005) Developmental plasticity and the
origin of species differences. \emph{Proc Natl Acad Sci} 102 Suppl
1:6543--6549.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-St_Pierre2022}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{16. }
\CSLRightInline{St Pierre CL, et al. (2022) Genetic, epigenetic, and
environmental mechanisms govern allele-specific gene expression.
\emph{Genome Res} 32(6):1042--1057.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lopes-Ramos2020}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{17. }
\CSLRightInline{Lopes-Ramos CM, et al. (2020) Sex differences in gene
expression and regulatory networks across 29 human tissues. \emph{Cell
Rep} 31(12):107795.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-He2021}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{18. }
\CSLRightInline{He F, et al. (2021) \emph{Cis}-regulatory evolution
spotlights species differences in the adaptive potential of gene
expression plasticity. \emph{Nat Commun} 12(1):3376.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Hadadi2022}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{19. }
\CSLRightInline{Hadadi N, et al. (2022) Comparative multi-tissue
profiling reveals extensive tissue-specificity in transcriptome
reprogramming during thermal adaptation. \emph{eLife} 11.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Tung2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{20. }
\CSLRightInline{Tung J, Zhou X, Alberts SC, Stephens M, Gilad Y (2015)
The genetic architecture of gene expression levels in wild baboons.
\emph{eLife} 4:e04729.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Naranjo2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{21. }
\CSLRightInline{Naranjo S, et al. (2015) Dissecting the genetic basis of
a complex cis-regulatory adaptation. \emph{PLoS Genet} 11(12):e1005751.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lynch1992}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{22. }
\CSLRightInline{Lynch CB (1992) Clinal variation in cold adaptation in
\emph{mus} \emph{domesticus}: Verification of predictions from
laboratory populations. \emph{Am Nat} 139(6):1219--1236.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ferris2021}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{23. }
\CSLRightInline{Ferris KG, et al. (2021) The genomics of rapid climatic
adaptation and parallel evolution in {North American} house mice.
\emph{PLoS Genet} 17(4):e1009495.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Phifer-Rixey2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{24. }
\CSLRightInline{Phifer-Rixey M, et al. (2018) The genomic basis of
environmental adaptation in house mice. \emph{PLoS Genet}
14(9):e1007672.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Bittner2021}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{25. }
\CSLRightInline{Bittner NKJ, Mack KL, Nachman MW (2021) Gene expression
plasticity and desert adaptation in house mice. \emph{Evolution}
75(6):1477--1491.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ballinger2022}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{26. }
\CSLRightInline{Ballinger MA, Nachman MW (2022) The contribution of
genetic and environmental effects to {Bergmann's} rule and {Allen's}
rule in house mice. \emph{Am Nat} 199(5):691--704.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mack2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{27. }
\CSLRightInline{Mack KL, Ballinger MA, Phifer-Rixey M, Nachman MW (2018)
Gene regulation underlies environmental adaptation in house mice.
\emph{Genome Res} 28(11):1636--1645.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Abumrad2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{28. }
\CSLRightInline{Abumrad NA (2017) The liver as a hub in thermogenesis.
\emph{Cell Metab} 26(3):454--455.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Simcox2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{29. }
\CSLRightInline{Simcox J, et al. (2017) Global analysis of plasma lipids
identifies {liver-derived} acylcarnitines as a fuel source for brown fat
thermogenesis. \emph{Cell Metab} 26(3):509--522.e6.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Cannon2004}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{30. }
\CSLRightInline{Cannon B, Nedergaard J (2004) Brown adipose tissue:
Function and physiological significance. \emph{Physiol Rev}
84(1):277--359.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Price2003}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{31. }
\CSLRightInline{Price TD, Qvarnstr√∂m A, Irwin DE (2003) The role of
phenotypic plasticity in driving genetic evolution. \emph{Proc Biol Sci}
270(1523):1433--1440.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ghalambor2007}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{32. }
\CSLRightInline{Ghalambor CK, McKAY JK, Carroll SP, Reznick DN (2007)
Adaptive versus non-adaptive phenotypic plasticity and the potential for
contemporary adaptation in new environments. \emph{Funct Ecol}
21(3):394--407.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fischer2016}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{33. }
\CSLRightInline{Fischer EK, Ghalambor CK, Hoke KL (2016) Can a network
approach resolve how adaptive vs nonadaptive plasticity impacts
evolutionary trajectories? \emph{Integr Comp Biol} 56(5):877--888.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ghalambor2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{34. }
\CSLRightInline{Ghalambor CK, et al. (2015) Non-adaptive plasticity
potentiates rapid adaptive evolution of gene expression in nature.
\emph{Nature} 525(7569):372--375.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Cowles2002}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{35. }
\CSLRightInline{Cowles CR, Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D, Lander ES (2002)
Detection of regulatory variation in mouse genes. \emph{Nat Genet}
32(3):432--437.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wittkopp2004}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{36. }
\CSLRightInline{Wittkopp PJ, Haerum BK, Clark AG (2004) Evolutionary
changes in \emph{cis} and \emph{trans} gene regulation. \emph{Nature}
430(6995):85--88.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-McManus2010}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{37. }
\CSLRightInline{McManus CJ, et al. (2010) Regulatory divergence in
drosophila revealed by {mRNA-seq}. \emph{Genome Res} 20(6):816--825.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Goncalves2012}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{38. }
\CSLRightInline{Goncalves A, et al. (2012) Extensive compensatory
cis-trans regulation in the evolution of mouse gene expression.
\emph{Genome Res} 22(12):2376--2384.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Shen2014}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{39. }
\CSLRightInline{Shen SQ, Turro E, Corbo JC (2014) Hybrid mice reveal
parent-of-origin and \emph{cis}- and \emph{trans}-regulatory effects in
the retina. \emph{PLoS One} 9(10):e109382.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mack2016}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{40. }
\CSLRightInline{Mack KL, Campbell P, Nachman MW (2016) Gene regulation
and speciation in house mice. \emph{Genome Res} 26(4):451--461.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Li2006}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{41. }
\CSLRightInline{Li Y, et al. (2006) Mapping determinants of gene
expression plasticity by genetical genomics in c. elegans. \emph{PLoS
Genet} 2(12):e222.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fumagalli2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{42. }
\CSLRightInline{Fumagalli M, et al. (2015) Greenlandic inuit show
genetic signatures of diet and climate adaptation. \emph{Science}
349(6254):1343--1347.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Hallmark2019}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{43. }
\CSLRightInline{Hallmark B, et al. (2019) Genomic evidence of local
adaptation to climate and diet in indigenous siberians. \emph{Mol Biol
Evol} 36(2):315--327.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Shore2013}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{44. }
\CSLRightInline{Shore AM, et al. (2013) Cold-induced changes in gene
expression in brown adipose tissue, white adipose tissue and liver.
\emph{PLoS One} 8(7):e68933.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Westerberg2006}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{45. }
\CSLRightInline{Westerberg R, et al. (2006) {ELOVL3} is an important
component for early onset of lipid recruitment in brown adipose tissue*.
\emph{J Biol Chem} 281(8):4958--4968.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-GTEx_Consortium2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{46. }
\CSLRightInline{GTEx Consortium, et al. (2017) Genetic effects on gene
expression across human tissues. \emph{Nature} 550(7675):204--213.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fraser2010}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{47. }
\CSLRightInline{Fraser HB, Moses AM, Schadt EE (2010) Evidence for
widespread adaptive evolution of gene expression in budding yeast.
\emph{Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A} 107(7):2977--2982.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fraser2011}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{48. }
\CSLRightInline{Fraser HB, et al. (2011) Systematic detection of
polygenic cis-regulatory evolution. \emph{PLoS Genet} 7(3):e1002023.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Harr2016}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{49. }
\CSLRightInline{Harr B, et al. (2016) Genomic resources for wild
populations of the house mouse, \emph{mus musculus} and its close
relative \emph{mus spretus}. \emph{Sci Data} 3(1):1--14.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Tichy1994}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{50. }
\CSLRightInline{Tichy H, Zaleska-Rutczynska Z, O'Huigin C, Figueroa F,
Klein J (1994) Origin of the north american house mouse. \emph{Folia
Biol} 40(6):483--496.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Morgan2022}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{51. }
\CSLRightInline{Morgan AP, et al. (2022) Population structure and
inbreeding in wild house mice (mus musculus) at different geographic
scales. \emph{Heredity} 129(3):183--194.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-York2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{52. }
\CSLRightInline{York RA, et al. (2018) Behavior-dependent \emph{cis}
regulation reveals genes and pathways associated with bower building in
cichlid fishes. \emph{Proc Natl Acad Sci} 115(47):E11081--E11090.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Berube2013}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{53. }
\CSLRightInline{B√©rub√© J, Garand C, Lettre G, Lebel M (2013) The
non-synonymous polymorphism at position 114 of the {WRN} protein affects
cholesterol efflux in vitro and correlates with cholesterol levels in
vivo. \emph{Exp Gerontol} 48(6):533--538.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Crowley2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{54. }
\CSLRightInline{Crowley JJ, et al. (2015) Analyses of allele-specific
gene expression in highly divergent mouse crosses identifies pervasive
allelic imbalance. \emph{Nat Genet} 47(4):353--360.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lemmon2014}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{55. }
\CSLRightInline{Lemmon ZH, Bukowski R, Sun Q, Doebley JF (2014) The role
of cis regulatory evolution in maize domestication. \emph{PLoS Genet}
10(11):e1004745.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Genissel2008}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{56. }
\CSLRightInline{Genissel A, McIntyre LM, Wayne ML, Nuzhdin SV (2008) Cis
and trans regulatory effects contribute to natural variation in
transcriptome of drosophila melanogaster. \emph{Mol Biol Evol}
25(1):101--110.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Verta2019}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{57. }
\CSLRightInline{Verta J-P, Jones FC (2019) Predominance of
\emph{cis}-regulatory changes in parallel expression divergence of
sticklebacks. \emph{eLife} 8:e43785.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Osada2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{58. }
\CSLRightInline{Osada N, Miyagi R, Takahashi A (2017) Cis- and
trans-regulatory effects on gene expression in a natural population of
drosophila melanogaster. \emph{Genetics} 206(4):2139--2148.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lovell2016}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{59. }
\CSLRightInline{Lovell JT, et al. (2016) Drought responsive gene
expression regulatory divergence between upland and lowland ecotypes of
a perennial {C4} grass. \emph{Genome Res} 26(4):510--518.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Gould2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{60. }
\CSLRightInline{Gould BA, Chen Y, Lowry DB (2018) Gene regulatory
divergence between locally adapted ecotypes in their native habitats.
\emph{Mol Ecol} 27(21):4174--4188.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fear2016}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{61. }
\CSLRightInline{Fear JM, et al. (2016) Buffering of genetic regulatory
networks in drosophila melanogaster. \emph{Genetics} 203(3):1177--1190.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Coolon2014}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{62. }
\CSLRightInline{Coolon JD, McManus CJ, Stevenson KR, Graveley BR,
Wittkopp PJ (2014) Tempo and mode of regulatory evolution in drosophila.
24(5):797--808.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Hart2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{63. }
\CSLRightInline{Hart JC, Ellis NA, Eisen MB, Miller CT (2018) Convergent
evolution of gene expression in two high-toothed stickleback
populations. \emph{PLoS Genet} 14(6):e1007443.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Jacobs2022}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{64. }
\CSLRightInline{Jacobs A, et al. (2022) Temperature-dependent gene
regulatory divergence underlies local adaptation with gene flow in the
{Atlantic} silverside. \emph{bioRxiv}:2022.04.27.489786.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lemos2008}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{65. }
\CSLRightInline{Lemos B, Araripe LO, Fontanillas P, Hartl DL (2008)
Dominance and the evolutionary accumulation of \emph{cis}- and
\emph{trans}-effects on gene expression. \emph{Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A}
105(38):14471--14476.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Emerson2010}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{66. }
\CSLRightInline{Emerson JJ, et al. (2010) Natural selection on cis and
trans regulation in yeasts. \emph{Genome Res} 20(6):826--836.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Signor2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{67. }
\CSLRightInline{Signor SA, Nuzhdin SV (2018) The evolution of gene
expression in \emph{cis} and \emph{trans}. \emph{Trends Genet}
34(7):532--544.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Buchberger2019}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{68. }
\CSLRightInline{Buchberger E, Reis M, Lu T-H, Posnien N (2019) Cloudy
with a chance of insights: Context dependent gene regulation and
implications for evolutionary studies. \emph{Genes} 10(7):492.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Chen2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{69. }
\CSLRightInline{Chen J, Nolte V, Schl√∂tterer C (2015) Temperature stress
mediates decanalization and dominance of gene expression in drosophila
melanogaster. \emph{PLoS Genet} 11(2):e1004883.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Cubillos2014}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{70. }
\CSLRightInline{Cubillos FA, et al. (2014) Extensive cis-regulatory
variation robust to environmental perturbation in arabidopsis.
\emph{Plant Cell} 26(11):4298--4310.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Li2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{71. }
\CSLRightInline{Li XC, Fay JC (2017) {Cis-regulatory} divergence in gene
expression between two thermally divergent yeast species. \emph{Genome
Biol Evol} 9(5):1120--1129.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ehrenreich2016}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{72. }
\CSLRightInline{Ehrenreich IM, Pfennig DW (2016) Genetic assimilation: A
review of its potential proximate causes and evolutionary consequences.
\emph{Ann Bot} 117(5):769--779.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Waddington1942}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{73. }
\CSLRightInline{Waddington CH (1942) Canalization of development and the
inheritance of acquired characters. \emph{Nature} 150(3811):563--565.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Waddington1952}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{74. }
\CSLRightInline{Waddington CH (1952) Selection of the genetic basis for
an acquired character. \emph{Nature} 169(4302):625--626.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Waddington1953}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{75. }
\CSLRightInline{Waddington CH (1953) Genetic assimilation of an acquired
character. \emph{Evolution} 7(2):118--126.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Van_der_Burg2020}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{76. }
\CSLRightInline{Burg KRL van der, et al. (2020) Genomic architecture of
a genetically assimilated seasonal color pattern. \emph{Science}
370(6517):721--725.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ntambi2002}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{77. }
\CSLRightInline{Ntambi JM, et al. (2002) Loss of {stearoyl-CoA}
desaturase-1 function protects mice against adiposity. \emph{Proc Natl
Acad Sci} 99(17):11482--11486.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lee2004}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{78. }
\CSLRightInline{Lee S-H, et al. (2004) Lack of {stearoyl-CoA} desaturase
1 upregulates basal thermogenesis but causes hypothermia in a cold
environment. \emph{J Lipid Res} 45(9):1674--1682.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Riddell2021}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{79. }
\CSLRightInline{Riddell EA, Patton JL, Beissinger SR (2022) Thermal
adaptation of pelage in desert rodents balances cooling and insulation.
\emph{Science} (in press).}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Chen2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{80. }
\CSLRightInline{Chen S, Zhou Y, Chen Y, Gu J (2018) Fastp: An ultra-fast
all-in-one {FASTQ} preprocessor. \emph{Bioinformatics}
34(17):i884--i890.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Dobin2013}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{81. }
\CSLRightInline{Dobin A, et al. (2013) {STAR}: Ultrafast universal
{RNA-seq} aligner. \emph{Bioinformatics} 29(1):15--21.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Anders2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{82. }
\CSLRightInline{Anders S, Pyl PT, Huber W (2015) {HTSeq--a} python
framework to work with high-throughput sequencing data.
\emph{Bioinformatics} 31(2):166--169.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Love2014}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{83. }
\CSLRightInline{Love MI, Huber W, Anders S (2014) Moderated estimation
of fold change and dispersion for {RNA-seq} data with {DESeq2}.
\emph{Genome Biol} 15(12):550.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mallard2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{84. }
\CSLRightInline{Mallard F, Jak≈°iƒá AM, Schl√∂tterer C (2018) Contesting
the evidence for non-adaptive plasticity. \emph{Nature}
555(7698):E21--E22.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Benjamini1995}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{85. }
\CSLRightInline{Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y (1995) Controlling the false
discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing.
\emph{J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol} 57(1):289--300.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Langmead2012}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{86. }
\CSLRightInline{Langmead B, Salzberg SL (2012) Fast gapped-read
alignment with bowtie 2. \emph{Nat Methods} 9(4):357--359.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Van_de_Geijn2015}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{87. }
\CSLRightInline{Geijn B van de, McVicker G, Gilad Y, Pritchard JK (2015)
{WASP}: Allele-specific software for robust molecular quantitative trait
locus discovery. \emph{Nat Methods} 12(11):1061--1063.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Coolon2018}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{88. }
\CSLRightInline{Coolon JD, McManus CJ, Stevenson KR, Graveley BR,
Wittkopp PJ (2018) Corrigendum: Tempo and mode of regulatory evolution
in drosophila. \emph{Genome Res} 28(11):1766.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mack2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{89. }
\CSLRightInline{Mack KL, Nachman MW (2017) Gene regulation and
speciation. \emph{Trends Genet} 33(1):68--80.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Zheng2012}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{90. }
\CSLRightInline{Zheng X, et al. (2012) A high-performance computing
toolset for relatedness and principal component analysis of {SNP} data.
\emph{Bioinformatics} 28(24):3326--3328.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Yi2010}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{91. }
\CSLRightInline{Yi X, et al. (2010) Sequencing of 50 human exomes
reveals adaptation to high altitude. \emph{Science} 329(5987):75--78.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Crawford2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{92. }
\CSLRightInline{Crawford JE, et al. (2017) Natural selection on genes
related to cardiovascular health in {high-altitude} adapted andeans.
\emph{Am J Hum Genet} 101(5):752--767.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Danecek2011}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{93. }
\CSLRightInline{Danecek P, et al. (2011) The variant call format and
{VCFtools}. \emph{Bioinformatics} 27(15):2156--2158.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Malaspinas2016}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{94. }
\CSLRightInline{Malaspinas A-S, et al. (2016) A genomic history of
aboriginal australia. \emph{Nature} 538(7624):207--214.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Quinlan2010}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{95. }
\CSLRightInline{Quinlan AR, Hall IM (2010) {BEDTools}: A flexible suite
of utilities for comparing genomic features. \emph{Bioinformatics}
26(6):841--842.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mi2013}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{96. }
\CSLRightInline{Mi H, Muruganujan A, Thomas PD (2013) PANTHER in 2013:
Modeling the evolution of gene function, and other gene attributes, in
the context of phylogenetic trees. \emph{Nucleic Acids Res}
41:D377--86.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Thomas2003}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{97. }
\CSLRightInline{Thomas PD, et al. (2003) {PANTHER}: A library of protein
families and subfamilies indexed by function. \emph{Genome Res}
13(9):2129--2141.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Weng2017}{}%
\CSLLeftMargin{98. }
\CSLRightInline{Weng M-P, Liao B-Y (2017) {modPhEA}: Model organism
phenotype enrichment analysis of eukaryotic gene sets.
\emph{Bioinformatics} 33(21):3505--3507.}

\end{CSLReferences}



% Bibliography
% \bibliography{pnas-sample}

\end{document}
